Add "Understanding dataflow" user guide (#5737)
marimo-team/marimo: docs/guides/editor_features/dataflow.md

# Understanding dataflow

> Unlike traditional notebooks, marimo understands the relationships between
> cells and uses this information to keep your code and outputs consistent. This
> is known as the **dataflow graph**; cells can be written out of order and
> automatically run (or are marked as stale) in the correct sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike traditional notebooks, marimo understands the relationships between
cells and uses this information to keep your code and outputs consistent. These
relationships are represented as a **dataflow graph**, which encodes
how variables flow from one cell to another. The dataflow graph, which is inferred
statically from variable definitions and references, is used to 
automatically run (or mark stale) cells in the correct sequence; it's also why
cells can be arranged "out of order" on the page, or across columns.
```

</picture>
</div>

To open the dependency explorer, click the **graph icon** in the **left sidebar
panel**. You can choose between vertical or horizontal layouts.

## Minimap

The **minimap** provides a _focused slice_ of your notebook's dataflow, helping
you understand the reactive context of a given cell and navigate related cells.
You can toggle the minimap a _hotkey_ (`Cmd/Ctrl-Shift-i`), or select the **map
icon** from the **footer toolbar**.

Click a cell in the minimap to jump to it:

<div align="center">
<video autoplay muted loop playsinline style="max-width: 700px; width: 100%;">
  <source src="/_static/docs-minimap.webm" type="video/webm">
  <source src="/_static/docs-minimap.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>
</div>

Connections are read **left to right**:

- Connections to the **left** are _direct inputs_ — cells the current cell reads from
- Connections to the **right** are _direct outputs_ — cells that read from the current cell
- Cells positioned left or right but not directly connected are _transitive
dependencies_ — cells that influence or are influenced by the current cell, but
only through one or more intermediate cells

> The minimap can take some getting used to, but it's effective representation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The minimap can take some getting used to, but it's an effective representation
```

        indicate transitive dependencies
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>
        <svg viewBox="-18 -8 36 32" width="36" style="color: #ff6565">
          <circle r="3" fill="currentColor"></circle>
          <path d="M 0 0 H 7 V 21 H -7 V 0 Z" fill="none" stroke-width="2" stroke="currentColor"></path>
          <circle r="3" cy="21" fill="currentColor"></circle>
        </svg>
      </td>
      <td>
        Cells have circular dependencies - each uses variables from the other
        (error)
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

### Implementation notes

The minimap was heavily inspired by [Observable's
minimap](https://observablehq.com/documentation/debugging/minimap), a
[thoughtfully
designed](https://observablehq.com/@observablehq/introducing-visual-dataflow)
dataflow visualization for their reactive JavaScript notebooks.

We adapted Observable's visual design to marimo's execution model. A key
difference: Observable cells are named (declaring one variable), while marimo
cells can define multiple variables. This property creates asymmetric dataflow
tracing, where we can trace specific variables upstream, but downstream we all

> cells affected by any variable from the selected cell. Our minimap also handles

Reviewer: "we all" — missing word?
